The goal of this section is to provide a comprehensive background of the theory
and techniques used in gravitational wave pulsar astrophysics.

It is necessary, then, to first understand what a pulsar is. When a large star
reaches the end of its life cycle, it has the potential to go supernova. This
occurs when the core of the star runs out of material to fuse, and the fusion
reactions begin to slow down. As the rate of fusion decreases, the outward
pressure caused by the fusion also decreases. There reaches a point, then, when
the pressure due to fusion does not balance the gravitational pressure of the
star. At that point, the star collapses on itself in a catastrophic event.
After such an event, there are a few possibilities for the outcome of the core
remnants of the star. If the gravitational pressure is enough to force the core
past its Scwarzshield radius, the core will collapse into a black hole. On the
other hand, if the gravitational pressure is relatively weak, the core will
remain relatively undisturbed, and will become a white dwarf star. In the
intermediary range between these two possibilities lies a third one; if the
gravitational pressure is just barely not enough to force the core into a black
hole state, it will instead force the formation of a neutron star.
Neutron stars are the most extreme objects in the universe. With such intense
gravitational pressure forming them, high-energy nuclear processes occur in the
atoms that formed the core of the original star. As protons and electrons are
pushed together, it becomes energetically favorable for the electrons to undergo
reverse beta decay, and fuse into neutrons. With no electrostatic repulsion
between the protons and electrons, the core mass--which is almost all neutrons
at this point--can collapse further on itself, achieving a density similar to
that of an atomic nucleus. At this point, the core mass has reached a stable
configuration, and is now a neutron star. More than an entire solar mass of core
material forms the star, which is spherical with a diameter of about 10km.

After the formation of the neutron star, there is a possibility that the star
will be "spun up" to high angular speeds. If the star was in a binary system,
it may accrete material from its companion, and take some angular momentum from
it. Since the neutron star is so small, a small change in angular momentum will
be magnified to a larger change in the angular velocity of the star.

Another peculiar feature of neutron stars is their intense magnetic fields--up
to 1e8 times as much as the earth. For neutron stars that are spinning rapidly,
this magnetic field moves very rapidly through space, accelerating free
electrons and causing synchrotron radiation. The radiation is then forced out of
the poles of the magnetic fields in a beam formation. 

A pulsar is exactly this sort of object--a rotating neutron star with beam
emissions of electromagnetic waves. Pulsars are particularly bright in radio
frequencies, which makes them best studied using radio telescopes. They have
very slow spin-down rates, so their periods are very stable in time. [P-Pdot
diagram here] As seen in the P-Pdot diagram, there exists a certain class of
pulsars with incredibly low periods and spin-down rates. These are known as the
millisecond pulsars, called such due to their extremely fast rotational periods.
With such amazing stability and cadence, millisecond pulsars function incredibly
well as stellar timekeepers--some rivaling even an atomic clock's precision. It
is this stability that makes millisecond pulsars the primary data source for
gravitational wave searches.

A gravitational wave is a perturbation in spacetime caused by a rotating
quadropole somewhere in the universe. The most common sources of gravitational
waves are black hole binary systems, especially supermassive black hole binaries
that occur in galaxy collisions. Such binary systems emit sinusoidal
gravitational waves that give rise to the perturbation [GW equation].
THis perturbation occurs in the local metric of the space, and represents a
change in the space-time intervals between objects. The co-ordinate distances
remain fixed, but the practical (read: light travel time) distance is perturbed
slightly.

The LIGO detectors recently announced the first detection of gravitational
waves. They detected a strain [deltaL/L = 1e-21], corresponding to an absolute
distance change on the order of a fraction of a proton diameter. The LIGO
observatory was able to detect such small changes in distance by using an
optimized interferometer. By splitting a laser along two orthogonal paths,
reflecting them back to each other, and observing the interference magnitude, an
interferometer is able to precisely measure miniscule changes in the
differential lengths of their arms. One way of conceptualizing the
interferometer is by following the crests of the laser across the device. The
crests are evenly spaced in the arm, and without loss of generality will
recombine constructively. However, imagine a change in the length of one of the
arms. Now, the crests along one arm have more distance to travel, and thus will
arrive delayed compared to their companions. Such a delay will induce a slightly
destructive interference in the resulting recombination beam, and will be
detectable by a light intensity detector. One can think of the stable arm as a
"reference beam", and the changing arm as the "detector beam". With this mode of
thinking, the interferometer acts as a comparison device between the reference
beam and the detector beam.

In a way, pulsar timing functions the same way as interferometers do. The line
of sight between us and the pulsar functions as the detector beam, with the
pulses originating from the pulsar functioning as the crests. In order to get
the equivalent of a reference beam, it is necessary to develop a timing model
that describes with great precision the expected time of arrival of the pulse
from the pulsar. With such a timing model, it is possible to compare the
measured time of arrival and the expected time of arrival to gain information
about the distance changes on the line of sight of the pulsar.

However, such a method requires an incredibly accurate timing model for the
pulsar that takes into account all known effects between the earth and the
pulsar. Such a model has been developed, and is used in the analysis pipeline to
accurately calculate the expected time of arrival of a pulse. The timing model
takes into account a wide array of effects. First and foremost, the timing model
requires a precise measurement of the period of the observed pulsar, as well as
the spindown rate, to model the pulse source accurately. Next, the timing model
takes into account the motion of the earth relative to the pulsar. The model
normalizes the times of arrival to the center of the solar system, and accounts
for the movement of the pulsar towards, away, or transverse to the solar system.
Next, the model takes into account any effects due to general relativity,
including the Shapiro delay effect for binary systems, and precession for
orbiting pulsars. [mention DM?]
The ultimate goal of the timing model is to "zero out" any known effects between
us and the pulsar. After the timing model is made, any deviation we observe from
the timing model must be due to some unmodelled effect.

At regular intervals, NANOGrav observes the 43 [?] pulsars that are in the
pulsar timing array. such observations allow comparisions to be made between the
expected times of arrival and the measured times of arrival. One use of these
observations is to improve the timing model for the pulsar. Deviations from the
timing model that follow known patterns due to incorrect timing model values can
give insight on how to improve the timing model parameters. [incorrect timing
model demo]. Thus, the timing model is "self-correcting" in the sense that
observations themselves improve the precision of the timing model.

However, there may be deviations from the timing model that do not correspond to
incorrect parameters. These deviations must necessarily, then, come from
unmodelled processes. Of the most importance is the deviation corresponding to a
sine-like change in the distance between us and the pulsar. Although there could
be many potential sources for such a perturbation, a likely candidate is a
gravitational wave between the earth and the pulsar. It is possible, however,
that such a sine-like signal corresponds to an unmodelled process in the timing
model. For example, if the pulsar were in a binary system that was not known
beforehand, it would appear as if the distance between us and the pulsar were
changing sinusoidally--because it actually is changing sinusoidally due to the
orbit of the pulsar around its companion! Many binary systems have been
discovered this way, long before the optical telescopes verify the existence of
the companion.

To verify whether or not a sine-like signal corresponds to a gravitational wave,
the data is searched for a time correlation between pulsars. If the sine wave
shows up in multiple pulsars, then it can be concluded that the signal is not
originating from an unmodelled process in any individual pulsar. Such a
correlated signal must, then. correspond to some unmodelled process in the space
between all the pulsars in the galaxy. Using the relative locations of the
pulsars, specifics of the sine signal can be probed. Polarity and propagation
direction can be ascertained from the relative amplitudes of the signals in the
different pulsars in the pulsar timing array.

[Section on stochastic background search]
